ipc: add dynamically allocated buffers to icmsg (#58741)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/services/ipc/ipc_service/backends/ipc_service_icmsg_with_buf.rst

.. _ipc_service_backend_icmsg_with_buf:

ICMsg with dynamically allocated buffers backend
################################################

This backend is built on top of the :ref:`ipc_service_backend_icmsg`.

> Data transferred over this backend travels in dynamically allocated
> buffers on shared memory. The ICMsg is used to send just references to
> those buffers. It also supports multiple endpoints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data transferred over this backend travels in dynamically allocated buffers on shared memory.
The ICMsg just sends references to the buffers.
It also supports multiple endpoints.
```

> This architecture allows for overcoming some common problems
> with other backends (mostly related to multithread access and zero-copy).
> That is why this backend provides an alternative that has no known significant
> limitations like the others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This architecture allows for overcoming some common problems with other backends (mostly related to multithread access and zero-copy).
This backend provides an alternative with no significant limitations.
```

Overview
========

> The shared memory is divided into two parts. One is reserved for the ICMsg and
> the other contains equal-sized blocks. The number of blocks is configured in
> the devicetree.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The shared memory is divided into two parts.
One is reserved for the ICMsg and the other contains equal-sized blocks.
The number of blocks is configured in the devicetree.
```

The data sending process is following:

> * The sender allocates one or more blocks. If there are not enough sequential
>   blocks, it waits using the timeout provided in the parameter which also
>   includes K_FOREVER and K_NO_WAIT.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The sender allocates one or several blocks.
  If there are not enough sequential blocks, it waits using the timeout provided in a parameter (including K_FOREVER and K_NO_WAIT).
```

> * The allocated blocks are filled with data. For the zero-copy case, this is
>   done by the caller, otherwise, it is copied automatically.
>   During this time other threads are not blocked in any way as long as there are
>   enough free blocks for them. They can allocate, send data and receive data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The allocated blocks are filled with data.
  For the zero-copy case, this is done by the caller, otherwise, it is copied automatically.
  During this time, other threads are not blocked in any way as long as there are
  enough free blocks for them.
  They can allocate, send, and receive data.
```

> * A message containing block index is sent over ICMsg to the receiver.
>   The size of the ICMsg queue is big enough to hold messages for all blocks, so
>   it will never overflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A message containing the block index is sent over ICMsg to the receiver.
  The size of the ICMsg queue is large enough to hold messages for all blocks, so
  it will never overflow.
```

> * The receiver can hold the data as long as he wants. Again, other threads are
>   not blocked as long as there are enough free blocks for them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The receiver can hold the data as long as desired.
  Again, other threads are not blocked as long as there are enough free blocks for them.
```

> * When data is no longer needed, backed sends a release message over ICMsg.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When data is no longer needed, the backend sends a release message over ICMsg.
```

> * When backed receives this message, it deallocates blocks. It is done
>   internally by the backend and it is invisible to the caller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When the backend receives this message, it deallocates all blocks.
  It is done internally by the backend and it is invisible to the caller.
```

Configuration
=============

> The backend is configured via Kconfig and devicetree.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The backend is configured using Kconfig and devicetree.
```

When configuring the backend, do the following:

> * Define two memory regions and assign them to ``tx-region`` and ``rx-region``
>   of an instance. Ensure that the memory regions used for data exchange are
>   unique (not overlapping any other region) and accessible by both domains
>   (or CPUs).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Define two memory regions and assign them to ``tx-region`` and ``rx-region`` of an instance.
  Ensure that the memory regions used for data exchange are unique (not overlapping any other region) and accessible by both domains (or CPUs).
```

* Define the number of allocable blocks for each region with ``tx-blocks`` and
  ``rx-blocks``.

> * Define MBOX devices which are used to send the signal that informs the other
>   domain (or CPU) that data has been written. Ensure that the other domain
>   (or CPU) is able to receive the signal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Define MBOX devices for sending a signal that informs the other domain (or CPU) of the written data.
  Ensure that the other domain (or CPU) can receive the signal.
```

See the following configuration example for one of the instances:

.. code-block:: devicetree

   reserved-memory {
      tx: memory@20070000 {
         reg = <0x20070000 0x0800>;
      };

      rx: memory@20078000 {
         reg = <0x20078000 0x0800>;
      };
   };

   ipc {
      ipc0: ipc0 {
         compatible = "zephyr,ipc-icmsg-with-buf";
         tx-region = <&tx>;
         rx-region = <&rx>;
         tx-blocks = <16>;
         rx-blocks = <32>;
         mboxes = <&mbox 0>, <&mbox 1>;
         mbox-names = "tx", "rx";
         status = "okay";
      };
   };

> You must provide a similar configuration for the other side of the
> communication (domain or CPU) but you must swap the MBOX channels, memory
> regions (``tx-region`` and ``rx-region``) and block count (``tx-blocks`` and
> ``rx-blocks``).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You must provide a similar configuration for the other side of the communication (domain or CPU).
Swap the MBOX channels, memory regions (``tx-region`` and ``rx-region``) and block count (``tx-blocks`` and
``rx-blocks``).
```
